>> I felt like Humpty Dumpty.
I'd fallen off the
wall of normalcy,
and I had cracked into
a million tiny pieces.
And I was so scared
that I was going
to spend the rest of
my life just broken.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We have people
with chronic pain.
We have people that are--
polypharmacy is what we call it
in my profession, which means
they're on way too many meds.
And they take medication
for one thing,
and then that medication
causes a side effect.
And then the doctor
says, oh, here,
take this for that side effect.
And then before you know it,
they're on five to 10 drugs.
>> I was so weak, and there
was so much pain and so much
discomfort that even the very
smallest things like sitting up
on the couch to just reach
forward and pick up a glass
of water was something that I
had to sit for a solid minute
and mentally work
myself up to doing,
knowing that the cost of just
reaching and grabbing that
glass of water was going to
be pain that takes your breath
away.
>> There's this understanding
of finality that comes with,
how many more sunrises
can I get up and watch?
Man, when you're thrown
to the fire of you
could lose your spouse of
10 years and best friend,
you fucking talk about shit.
>> I don't think
I feel invisible.
I think I feel like
nobody really gets it.
Nobody can help me.
Nobody can help me heal myself.
>> It's very difficult for these
patients to get the help they
need in the conventional medical
system because they come up
against a lot of resistance.
We have very savvy
patients nowadays.
They have access, like all
of us do, to a wide variety
of information.
And they're very well educated.
And so they are trying to
be their own advocates,
but they're oftentimes
met with resistance.
>> When you see people
walking around in the street,
you don't make
assumptions about people.
Or maybe you do, but
you make assumptions
based on what you see,
not what's inside.
>> This experience has led me to
become more connected to myself
and to aspects of myself
that had been hibernating.
Because in some ways I feel
like that's why we're here,
is to create and
to allow ourselves
to heal through the
process of creation.
And I believe when I'm
creating that my body knows
that I'm doing something new.
And it can learn
lessons from that.
It can heal again.
It can start things anew
and fresh every single day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For me, an invisible illness
is anything that you could keep
hidden if you wanted to.
But when you see somebody
walking or running,
there's really no
way for us to know.
And so a lot of people
are suffering in silence,
or they're dealing
with things in silence.
For me, that's invisible,
because we don't see it.
And sometimes people
themselves can't see it
in their own bodies.
They know that something's off,
but they don't know what it is.
And I think that's also--
that sort of fits the definition
for me of an invisible illness.
I mean, it doesn't have
a name, that doctors
can't diagnose, that
they can't treat,
that they can't give
you medicine for.
>> I feel like the illness
itself is invisible because I
do look healthy, and
I do look capable.
It's difficult to see
people one day where they're
like, oh, you look great, I'm
so glad you're feeling better,
and have that same person
need something from you
or ask something of you.
They're seeing you.
They're aware that you're there.
They're glad that you're
doing well and all of this,
but they don't have a real
understanding of how much that
might fluctuate day to day.
I think that realization,
almost more than anything,
it opened up this
well of compassion
for people, for all people, all
these people that I don't know,
to knowing myself, like what
was actually going on with me,
and to realize, how many
other people are out there
with these illnesses, with
these horrific things they're
dealing with on an hourly
basis that I can't see?
And yeah, I think it
was the first time
that I had just this
overwhelming compassion
for humanity and the
struggles that we are all
going through all the time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When you live with
an invisible illness,
it's anything but
invisible to you.
And in your own life, it
changes and colors everything.
It can affect your sleep.
So that means you
could have insomnia,
or you could have like
I do-- night terrors,
and sleepwalking, and
sleep disturbances,
which means that I'm
not getting good sleep.
Even if I go to bed
on time and even
if I tried to do all of
the sleep hygiene things,
I still am not getting sleep.
So I'm exhausted.
Even with the SIBO
that I deal with,
the small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth,
that leads to anemia
and iron deficiency,
which, again, leads to chronic
fatigue and lack of energy.
So when I do get up and
I do have the energy
to get something done
or go about my day,
because of the digestive
issues that I have,
because of the SIBO, I
have a very limited diet,
which means that I have
to cook all of my food.
And that takes energy and effort
throughout the day as well.
>> Her hands , for her.
Her hands were
outstretched in front.
And so the energy of the impact
came straight up into her body
from both the points of her
hands, as well as her knee.
Anytime we're hit and
our bodies are traveling
at a certain speed,
and whatever hits us,
whether it's another
person or a vehicle
is traveling at a faster
speed, what we find
is that vibration
travels through us
and creates trauma
at many levels.
And that's physical in the
muscles, in the organs.
And so when she lay down, I just
felt this sense of total shake
in her body.
>> Before I dealt with
invisible illness,
I would not have had any idea
how many areas of your life it
could affect, how significantly
it could impact your life
in the tiniest little
decisions to the largest ones,
from the kind of car you have to
whether or not you wear makeup,
to the clothing and the
shoes that you wear,
to where you travel
or if you travel.
It even affects how
I can wear my hair
and if I even get
to keep my hair.
Because I had hair that
was down to my waist.
And when I started dealing
with the digestive issues,
and with the SIBO, and
with the iron deficiency,
I started losing my hair.
At some point, I had to
make the decision to cut off
a significant amount.
>> She's a beautiful lady.
And I remember thinking
how traumatic it must have
been to be hit by a vehicle.
Because I had seen people before
have been very bad accidents,
where their car
has been impacted.
But being physically hit
yourself is a whole 'nother
story.
Energetically and
emotionally, her body
was not completely together.
So it was almost like
the moment of the impact
separated her from
parts of herself.
>> Things change
from day to day.
And you can have a good
day, and make plans,
and think that you're going
to be able to do all of them.
And then when the day
shows up you haven't slept,
or I haven't slept
all night long.
And so I have to cancel
plans or change things.
And that's really hard because
it does feel like I'm a flake,
or I'm lazy, or I just
don't want to show up.
And it's the complete
opposite of reality.
The reality is I want so much
to show up in my life, 100%,
all the time.
And I want to be available.
And I want to have the
energy to live, and do,
and be all of the things
that I dream of doing.
And the reality of
invisible illness
is that it's not my reality.
>> The pain has had a great
impact in my fitness career.
My career as an instructor
was put on hold in some ways.
And it didn't progress as
much as the other instructors.
And it was because I was
always getting injured.
It looked like I
was always injured,
and I was always
taped constantly.
They always put you in the
back room when that happens.
I mean, you're
supposed to be healthy.
You're supposed to be whole.
And you're not.
You're broken.
Many times I stayed in bed.
And you talk to people,
you email people,
you chat with people
with the same problem.
And they listen to you, but
in the end you're by yourself.
And if you don't stand
up, and you get going,
and you go for
that walk, nobody's
going to do it for you.
If you don't open that door
for yourself, you're done for.
You need to get up,
brush that hair,
put that makeup on,
put that scarf on.
Basically that's it.
It's on you.
>> I have pain every day from
the moment I wake up until
the moment I go to sleep.
When I get up in the morning,
I can barely get out of bed.
And if I go out and
have a great day,
I know by the time I get
home I can barely walk.
And part of the
effort and energy
is being happy around people.
It's hard, I think, to always
put on the face of, I'm great.
I'm doing good.
I'm having a good time.
Like that question, how are you?
Everybody hates that question.
If you have a chronic illness, I
don't want to burden the person
with how I'm feeling.
So it's more like,
I'm doing great.
Or I think now I just
say, I'm all right,
because it's a tough one.
The thing is, you
know they're asking
and they truly want to
know, how are you feeling?
How bad is your pain today?
But if you always
tell the truth,
I feel like I'm such
a Debbie Downer.
>> People minimize trauma.
They think trauma has
to be in a combat zone.
Or I didn't think I
qualified to be in the chair
at Harborview Sexual Assault
and Traumatic Stress Counseling
Center.
I thought that was
for veterans of war
and some woman that was gang
raped by five strangers.
I didn't know that I
qualified to sit in that seat
because of all the multitude
of traumas I've had.
So I bless it all.
It really is a
blessing, even the stuff
that's going on today.
It's temporary, so I bless it,
bless it, bless it, bless it,
because it's going to pass.
And it's going to be different.
Even when I was single and
I didn't want to be single,
I was like, bless it.
Fuck it, because I've
got the whole couch.
I can spread out.
There's room for me
and my dog, and I
can let the dishes pile up.
And I'm not
accountable to anybody.
And as soon as I started
blessing that, boom,
somebody put a ring on it.
>> Well, the first thing was
deciding to get involved with
her in the first place, which
was a pretty big decision
because I was thinking about
all hiking, and traveling,
and camping, and stuff like that
that I like to do on a cycle.
She keeps canceling our dates.
[LAUGHS] How am I going to--
is that really what I want?
And so I didn't.
I asked her out a
few times, and she
kept canceling because she
wasn't able to make it.
She was sick.
And so I started
dating other people.
But I remember at one point
I just wrote a text to her,
and I said, you just draw me.
I couldn't stay away.
>> When I park in
my handy parking,
I noticed that I was wincing.
I was trying to visibly
show the pain, because God
forbid should somebody
see me walking all fine.
But it is a deal
breaker when it's like,
do I walk 50 feet to the store?
Sure, I can do that.
But can I walk back
with my groceries?
No, I can't, not
without hurting myself.
So the handy parking
is really helpful.
And I use it.
And I noticed-- it was
about a year or two ago,
I noticed I was like, oh,
so nobody would look at me
and think, she
scammed that card,
or she doesn't qualify
somehow to be disabled.
I wanted bruises.
I wanted scars.
I wanted to lose my hair.
I wanted visible signs, visible
evidence that I was sick.
Because I didn't want to have
to explain it every time.
It was exhausting.
>> Feel like I'm constantly
jumping from one thing
to another thing to another
thing to try to heal myself
and none of it working.
My body's tired.
My heart is tired.
So not specifically tired of
things, but more just tired.
I'm not finding
answers that work.
Try so many different things
in so many different ways.
Then I get thinking
and judging myself--
should have stayed with that,
or should have done this,
should have taken that
medication longer,
should have taken--
not ate that lemon
bar, shouldn't have--
and all the should've,
should've, should'ves, and then
judging myself and assuming
I would be healed by now.
I'm not.
>> You will never ever catch
me saying cancer is a blessing
because I think that's
kind of bullshit.
But at this point, I don't
know that I would necessarily
trade that out
because I don't think
that I would be anywhere
near who I am now,
just that the number of days
I even have left on the Earth
is so finite.
I go after them with a
vigor that I would not
have had if I had carried
on in the oblivion of youth,
where you're like, I'm alive,
and things are possible,
and I can do whatever I want.
Earlier this week, I had
this strange recognition
that the number of sunrises
that I or any human
gets to see in their
lifetime is limited.
There's an actual
number to that,
and we can't know what it is.
And I was thinking
about that and thinking
where I am this summer, where
I am in my body right now
is the most physically capable
that I have been in years.
And I realized that I
needed to have a sunrise.
I needed to know that I had done
that right now, just in case
I didn't make it
past this month.
That thought, I guess,
it got me out of bed,
hiking up the closest
mountain here and up
watching the sun actually
crest over the Cascade Range.
And I think it's
things like that,
that if I did not have the same
sense of the tentative nature
of life and just the
ebb and flow of what
our bodies on any given
day might actually
be capable of doing,
I think I probably
would have stayed in bed and
just gotten that extra three
hours of sleep.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think one of the hardest
things for a loved one,
particularly a spouse,
living with someone who has
an invisible illness, is the
fact that you don't see it.
>> (SINGING) Hush,
little darling.
Don't say a word.
I'm going to buy
you a mockingbird.
>> I couldn't empathize with it.
I didn't see the
pain she was having.
I didn't understand
the concept of being
in pain 24 hours a day.
And so I think
because of that, just
to be frank, I wasn't as
patient as I could have been,
as I should have been.
It was more than just the pain
that she was dealing with,
the physical pain.
There was an emotional, deeper
pain that came from the fact
that she couldn't
pick up her son.
I mean, at the time of the
accident he was around six.
So he was still at the age
where she could pick him up.
And that is profoundly
impactful for a mother
not to have the ability
to hold her son again.
>> One thing that is more
emotional for me around
invisible illness is the way
that I am able to show up
as a mom and the way that I
have missed things with my kids
because of invisible illness.
More than my own
sacrifices, more
than my own losses,
the loss that I
feel for them in the time
that they get with me
or the energy I
have to participate
is probably the hardest for me.
>> Especially for those two, who
have such an amazing closeness
and such an incredible
relationship between mother
and son.
And they are so
close and loving.
So it was a huge deal for her
not to be able to do that.
It's like you lose a part
of yourself as a mother.
Even beyond that, the
person that she saw herself
as for so many years--
she was a dancer,
and she was a runner,
and she was a
photographer, and did
all these things that were
very physical that she
couldn't do anymore.
And when how you see yourself
has been profoundly changed
because of this accident
that you didn't have
any control over, it's more than
just the pain that affects you.
I'm confident that she'll
find more healing as she deals
with alternative forms of
medicine and alternative
forms of diet that can help
deal with her digestive issues
or her blood sugar issues and
to lead a life that will be more
like the life that she
once had where she can
do the things that she wanted
to do and have a healthier body.
And I'm blessed that I
still have my wife with me
and that we can
grow old together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I don't want to give
it juice all the time--
I'm sick, and oh--
with my husband.
He doesn't know I'm having a
shit day unless I tell him,
it's really bad today.
On a scale of one to
10, I'm at a nine.
So I just need to--
you need to keep
people away from me,
and you might want to stay away
yourself because I'm just--
>> I said it was
exhausting being with her--
not being with her, but--
I don't know exactly
how I said it.
But what I was referring to
was not the day-to-day chores,
because that's no big deal.
Like I said, I was
doing that anyway.
I don't mind doing that.
It's my privilege to do that.
I'm healthy.
I can do all that stuff.
I was referring
to how incredibly
quickly our lives change.
And I mean, we're
buying a houseboat.
We were expecting to move
to a little apartment,
and this houseboat was
plopped in our laps.
And I thought I would be
in this place for a while
and then would keep on to
it for retirement income
and that kind of stuff.
Well, now when
you're with Maleah,
you don't think that way.
That's what can be
sometimes exhausting, just
to keep up and allow such big
change to happen like this.
Our lives are
constantly changing.
I almost would say I'm
a different person--
living in the
moment, appreciating
every moment of life, and not
sweating the little stuff,
not thinking about the future
and the past, but gratitude.
Maleah is one of the most
grateful people I know--
excuse me--
one of the most
grateful people I know.
Because everything
is a gift when you've
been in bed for five years.
Everything's a gift.
I'm definitely happier
than I've ever been.
And you find that when you
go out there in the world
and you're happy, and you
express that happiness
and joy to people, all of a
sudden things go way better.
>> We all don't
want to be a burden.
And I think Kelly, more
than anyone I've ever known,
has fought so hard for strength
that to show signs of weakness
has never been an option.
>> I had to have Brad help me
dress and undress every day
because I couldn't do anything.
And no matter how many times he
or-- my various family members
came up and helped
out for a while.
But no matter how many
times they told me
that they were
happy to be helping
and that they wanted
to be there helping,
I had this fear inside
of me that at some point
the amount of burden
that I was causing them,
it was finally going to
get to the snapping point,
and they were just
going to be done with me
and just going to be like, we
have given all of the love,
and all of the assistance,
and all of the care
that we have to give, and now
we need to go live our lives.
And I just--
I didn't want to be a
burden, and I still don't.
>> Every time I allow myself
to open up enough to speak
of mortality and
Kelly's mortality,
there's that feeling that rises
just to under the surface.
And if I'm quick, I can
continue to speak about it.
I can bring it to the top
enough and look at it enough
that I can talk about it.
To stand next to somebody
who looks death in the face
and flips it off, and
says, fuck you, not today,
and then keeps going
on about her business--
medications have
kept Kelly alive.
There's no doubt that
they played their role.
But god damn if this girl
hasn't willed herself to live.
And for better or worse, with
that comes a fervor for life
that means get with it,
because we're moving.
We're doing things.
And you can be a part of
this or not, but I'm going.
I have never known
someone so full of life
when faced with death.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So my mom has an invisible
illness, so to speak.
Her illness is called
cerebellar ataxia.
It's a neurological condition
that affects her coordination
and fine motor skills.
It's a lesion on her cerebellum.
And she was diagnosed when
she was in her early 30s,
so I was just a newborn baby.
She's been living with
it for 35 plus years.
And she and her twin sister
were diagnosed at the same time.
At times, I have felt a little
gagged around, how much am I--
how much is OK to
share about my mom?
Because it's her primary story.
I'm a secondary person in
the story of her illness,
but yet I do have my own story
around it as her daughter.
And how do you explain that to
a kid, to one of my friends?
It's like, can you
come do this with me?
Can you play, or can you meet
up and do this project with me?
Well, no, I just have
responsibilities at home.
And I remember my mom
would say, blame it on me.
It's OK.
You can just be
honest, blame it on me.
But I didn't--
I don't know.
I didn't want to blame
everything on her.
But yeah, I guess
now as an adult
I'm getting more
motivated to make myself
a primary character
in this story
and share it from
my perspective,
use my voice with it
because I have felt stifled
around talking about it.
>> People don't
even know, like--
oh, yeah, you hung out with
your mom some other place
than your living room?
[LAUGHTER]
That's great.
That's awesome.
For me personally, it's
been a solid five, six
years of just trying to
rebuild the relationship that
was pretty damaged
from her own problems
and my problems as well.
So where I'm at now,
I work with kids.
I'm about to start
a little graduate
program for counseling.
So I think it definitely
affected where I'm going now.
>> Some of her physical
problems is her back spine.
And a long time
ago, her leg hurt.
It's working now,
but she used to have
to wear a pad to keep it.
And when we were traveling,
she needed a cane.
And she needed it everywhere.
And even in the airport
she needed a wheelchair
because she can't walk that
much, because she can't walk up
the steps, and
it's normally hard.
So she can just
call me for help,
and then I can help
her down the steps.
And I know when she needs it.
So I felt very helpful and
that I should enjoy the time
I have with her.
>> How did that make you feel
when you saw her go through
that?
>> I feel sad, but I was so
happy that she was alive.
>> If I had any advice for
someone navigating the current
health care system with a lot
of different symptoms that they
have and they're just not really
sure what exactly they do have,
be tenacious.
Don't give up.
Just keep going for
it, moving forward.
And if one person tells you
you're crazy, fuck them.
Just move on.
>> Being responsible for your
own health and your own care is
always a great thing.
I can't imagine
going through life
and not being in charge of my
own health, and my own care,
and my own world.
So I think for other
patients, I would always
recommend that they're
their own advocates,
that they fight
for their answers.
Like I said before,
you listen to that gut.
If you listen to
that intuition, it
will lead you in a
different direction.
And that's really the only way
to work around this system,
it really is, to just fight
for what you know is right
or if it's wrong.
Fight to find those answers.
>> Once I found out what
I had been diagnosed with,
I scoured everything.
I went to every bookstore.
I bought every
book I could find.
I looked at everything
I could find.
And actually at that point,
it wasn't very accepted.
So like I said, my
doctor didn't accept it.
So I had to be my own advocate.
I'd have to go in
there, and I'd have
to keep saying fibromyalgia, and
she would still not accept it.
And it went on.
I mean, literally every time I
left the doctor I was in tears.
>> So the best thing that we
can do is become our own patient
advocate because we know when
there's something innately
wrong in our body.
We get that whole feeling,
that pit in our stomach,
the closing of our throat.
We're worried.
We know when there's
something wrong.
In order to stay well and
healthy in today's society
is to just listen to that
gut intuition and that gut
instinct, because
we're all born with it.
It's just trained out of us.
>> You can fire any medical
or health practitioner that
isn't doing your work for you.
If they're not
hearing you, if you
don't have a good
relationship with them,
if you don't feel like you can
tell them whatever you need,
that is not a good person
for you to work with.
Not everybody that comes in
here is a good person for me
to work with.
Some people need to be spoken
to in a really different way
than I'm going to be able to do.
And that's good.
Go find somebody
who can help you.
>> The story of my mom
is a very personal one,
and it was when my thermography
job became my thermography
passion.
So we do a thermogram, and
she has a notable amount
of more heat in her left
breast than her right, which
thermographically is suspicious
because the breasts should
be somewhat symmetrical.
So even if you have a crazy
lymphatic line in one,
you should have a crazy
lymphatic line in the other,
arguably.
So we do a thermogram on my mom.
I find this heat pattern,
and I'm like, mom,
I'd be more comfortable
if you got an ultrasound.
Because an ultrasound
is the only thing
that can differentiate
between a solid mass--
that would be a tumor--
or a fluid-filled cyst-- that
would be just a benign cyst
or fibrocyst in the breast.
And so she gets an ultrasound.
And it's a solid
mass, they find.
The ultrasound found it.
And then she gets a biopsy, and
it's cancer in the left breast.
So a mammogram that she had six
months prior to this thermogram
missed it completely.
The thermogram found the heat,
the ultrasound found the tumor,
and then the biopsy
confirmed that it was cancer.
So it was stage two
cancer in the left breast.
And the doctor wanted her
to do a double mastectomy,
so both breasts removed,
with chemo and radiation.
And I was just like, hell, no.
There's no way that
you're doing this.
>> You are in charge of your
own health and well-being.
And as exhausting as
it is to keep looking,
I think you just got to
keep going until you feel
some resonance with
somebody or somebodies
who feel like they're
actually doing something
that makes sense to you.
>> So I became my mom's
patient advocate at that moment
because she didn't
know what to do.
And the doctors were bullying
her into this double mastectomy
and telling her that if
she has it in one breast,
it could come back
in the other breast,
and she needs to do radiation.
She needs to do chemotherapy.
And at that moment,
I was just like, no.
We're not doing any
of these things.
I will be the patient advocate.
I know.
I've been working in the
thermography alternative
holistic health community
for a long time.
So I will now be your
patient advocate.
Because if you can't
be strong for yourself
and if you are really feeling
that your doctor is bullying
you, you just need
to find someone
who will stand up for you.
And if you're a mom that
has a feisty daughter,
usually the daughter can
be the patient advocate.
And so that's what I became.
So I told my mom she
could get a lumpectomy,
because a lumpectomy is just the
removal of the cancerous site
rather than the
entire breast itself.
And then we treated her
with the Gerson Therapy.
So the Gerson Therapy
is a natural way
of healing the body through
nutrition, dietary supplements,
juicing, enemas,
and dry brushing,
and all of these things.
But what it does is it
stimulates the liver.
It stimulates the
lymphatic system.
And then it also doesn't
introduce any sort
of antibiotic in a meat.
So she was eating healthy,
she was exercising,
and she was visualizing.
And to this day, she's fine.
And that was six years ago.
>> I think that if I could
offer up any kind of advice
to somebody else who is in
their own challenging invisible
illness, it would be to know
that whatever you are doing
at any given moment is
actually what's right for you.
Because I have been dealing with
this now for over six years,
I am so much more comfortable
and I feel so much more capable
than I did in the beginning
with challenging a doctor
or with asking more questions.
And I think back to when I
was very first diagnosed,
and I was just so afraid, and
I felt so lost that it just--
the only thing I
could even think to do
was whatever my
doctors told me to do.
And in a lot of ways that
was right, and in some ways
that was wrong.
But I made that decision at the
time based on the information
that I had.
I think that if you
can find any compassion
to have with yourself, and with
the decisions that you make,
and to know that even
as things may get harder
or as treatments might not work,
you're still actually learning.
You're still actually
learning about the illness
that you're living with, you're
learning about your voice,
and you're learning
what is actually
right and wrong for your body.
>> My advice to somebody that's
dealing with an invisible
illness or a chronic disease
would be to be your own
advocate first and foremost, to
not give up hope that there are
answers out there.
You could look up diseases,
and time and time again you'll
find there's no known cause.
No known cause is the typical
standard for so many diseases.
I don't believe that.
I believe that there is
a cause for all disease.
And so continue to search,
and to ask questions, and be
curious about your body.
And so this idea of being
able to care for myself
and take my health
care in my own hands
was really attractive to me.
So I consider us all
healers, in the sense
that if we start to investigate
how our body functions,
and who we are, and what
are the things that drive us
further away from balance--
and we start to minimize those--
and what are the things that
draw us closer to balance--
and we start to maximize those.
Then we're healers.
We're healing ourself.
And it's actually
very empowering
to think of ourselves
in that way.
>> So the health industry
doesn't really care about
people who have these
strange ailments.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The doctors that I
hear the best things about
in my practice seem to be
better at being more responsive
and cultivating more of
that artistic element.
They seem to be better at
looking at a whole person,
listening to a whole
person, trying to figure out
what's best for
them in any realm,
and getting them to
go that direction.
>> Anything that's not Western
medicine they don't want to pay
for in America.
I've spent thousands of
dollars out of my own pocket
or are in debt still
because of trying
to get testing done to
test food allergies,
test hormones, test
this, test that,
all these different tests.
And my health insurance
could say, oh, yeah,
we'll cover this, oh, we're
not going to cover this.
And it's just they don't care.
So I guess I feel invisible
to the health industry.
>> Our medical system in
the United States is what is
considered a sick care model.
So our doctors get
paid when we're sick,
not when we're well.
Breast cancer is a
billion dollar industry
in the United States.
So you get a mammogram, which
is 40 pounds of pressure
per square inch and ionizing
radiation that's scientifically
proven to cause breast cancer.
And now you're a customer.
So you got the mammogram.
They might have found something.
They might not have.
You have to get a
second mammogram
because a mammogram can't
differentiate between really
anything in the breast,
between dense breast,
fibroadenomas, cancer,
microcalcifications.
It actually can't
see the difference.
So then you'll get
recommended another mammogram.
And then let's just say
it's a false diagnosis.
So they say you have breast
cancer, and you don't.
Now you think you
have breast cancer,
so you're terrified, all
that emotional stress.
Now you're getting
potentially treatment
that's harmful to you.
And then the treatment is
radiation, chemotherapy,
and surgery, which radiation,
again, causes cancer.
Chemotherapy is poison that
strips the immune system.
The way chemotherapy
works is it kills
you, and your immune
system, and the cancer.
Sometimes you win,
sometimes the cancer wins.
But there is a slide
in my presentation
that has a doctor, a 1950s
advertisement showing
that doctors recommend Lucky
Strikes 50% of the time
more than others.
And it's like, well, we now know
that cigarettes cause cancer.
And so it's very easy to think
that doctors maybe don't have
our best interests in mind.
They're just doing
what they need
to do to survive, just
like everyone else.
There's nothing wrong with that.
But the problem is doctors
are supposed to help us.
So because I work with
women and because I
work in this
industry, I hear all
of the horror stories
of women getting
bullied into getting mammograms.
And their doctor will
actually yell at them
if they don't want a mammogram.
And they're basically
told what to do,
but, again, it goes against
that internal compass.
And so then you have a very
conflicted patient and woman
because she's on one side,
this doesn't feel or sound
right, but my doctor,
someone that I trust,
and someone who
practices medicine,
and someone that I'm supposed
to be able to count on,
they're bullying me into this,
but it doesn't feel good.
So I always jokingly
say, if the only way
to scan for
testicular cancer was
a vice that creates 40 pounds
of pressure and radiates,
I'm pretty sure guys would
invent something the next day.
>> When it comes to
traditional medicine--
I would say
conventional medicine--
the biggest issue
that I take is that I
feel like we're a little
bit misguided in our focus.
I feel that we're so obsessed
with finding the cure
that we forgot to ask a real
fundamental question, which
is why?
Why is this occurring?
Because if we start to
investigate the why,
then we see that we can start
to find the cause so that we
can start to really
give people the tools
that they'll need in order
to really start to heal.
We're chasing symptoms, and
we're trying to patch holes.
But the roots of those
diseases still exist.
>> So if I was really to invent
my own ideal world of health
care and professionals, I
think that the thing first
and foremost that I would
want to do is, honestly,
throw out all of the
statistics and all of the--
these are the
patterns that we have
of what has worked for somebody
who looks like you, who
is the same age, who is the
same weight, who is blah, blah,
blah.
Because what I have
learned in my experience
is that our bodies are all
so extraordinarily different,
and our physical body
is so intertwined
with our emotional body,
and our spiritual body,
and our mental body that
what is the exact right
combination for you of
support in all of those areas
and nourishment in
all of those areas,
there's absolutely no way that's
going to be the exact right
combination for me.
And I think that while there's
a lot of doctors who are really
doing their best, they look
at you as one of a data set.
And if it's not working,
then it's this big question,
and they still don't
look outside that set.
They continue looking in
this little group of people,
trying to see, well,
what's worked for her,
and what's worked for her,
and what's worked for her
rather than looking at
this larger picture of you
are your own unique individual.
And there's going to be all
these different experiences
coming at you and all these
different histories of what
you've gone through mentally,
physically, emotionally
that are adding up
to what is in you.
>> So the reason why it's really
hard for people with chronic
illness to get help from doctors
is sometimes the doctors just
simply don't believe them.
And again, that wears on the
psyche of clients and patients
who are just trying
to receive help.
But if the blood tests come
back normal and everything looks
normal on paper, then
doctors are like, well,
clearly there's
nothing wrong with you
because there's nothing
wrong on my chart,
and there's nothing
wrong in your blood,
and everything is
within normal range.
But my within normal
range is different
from your normal range is
different from someone else's
normal range.
So it's really hard
to do a blood panel
and just look at this
two-dimensional sheet of paper
and be like, yep, you're
all within normal range
when you have a
three-dimensional person
sitting next to you.
>> [SIGHS] If I had a dream, it
would be that people would have
a person who could look at a
whole bunch of things that were
going on for them and go, oh,
those two things don't work
together very well, or you're
not getting as much of this
as you might, whether
that's exercise or--
I mean, I think
people are trying
to do that now, but just--
or that people would be able
to do that for themselves more.
That would be a
lovely, lovely thing.
If there was enough
information, education
that wasn't confusing out
there where people could
get a sense of, this is
how I should be feeling,
these are some things that
might be contributing to me not
feeling that way, what
can I do about it?
>> If I had all of the power
to somehow shift and heal
the whole system--
I mean, really what I want most
is for the power to really feel
like it comes back to the
individual seeking support
and for the system to really
honor that when we show up
to any kind of health
care professional
that we're hiring
them to support us.
And the power dynamic
shifts around.
We're paying them for
their time, and expertise,
and support, and that
that really is honored
and in that orientation.
And yeah, ideally
there'd be health care
for all as part of, yeah, our
government benefits of being
a citizen and living here.
And yeah.
And I don't want to get into
the politics of all of that,
but it just feels like it's
a fundamental human right
to receive care and support
for our own well-being.
And as citizens
of any country, we
are paying taxes to
support, ideally,
the well-being of the citizens.
And that just seems
absolutely foundational.
>> If I can pray for the doctor
to arrive who would be perfect
for me, it would be someone
who is really ready to look
at every piece of me,
like all of the bodies
and the experiences
that make up me,
and for them to come from
that place and then prescribe
a treatment regimen rather than
looking up in a book the next
best thing and saying,
do this and report back.
>> The body knows
how to heal itself.
We just need to give our
body the proper nutrients
so that it can heal itself.
And we also need to believe
that it can heal itself.
Because one of the things that
the pharmaceutical companies
really cash in on
is our disbelief
that our body can heal itself.
Because if we don't think
that we can heal ourselves,
we need someone else to.
And that is usually
in the form of a pill.
So if you believe that your body
has the ability and capacity
to heal itself at any given
moment, that right there is
what will heal
your body, is what
will inspire health and
wellness in the body.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Happy
birthday, dear Joshua.
Happy birthday to you.
>> If I were to speak to kids
who were in this situation,
I would also tell them that any
question is a great question
and that they have every
right to feel all the feelings
they're feeling.
Sometimes life
sucks, but it's also
this disease is what makes
you and your family unique.
And that's also a gift.
I feel like there's also
always blessings that come
with disease and disorders.
Maybe that's hard to see
for people sometimes.
But I do think that disease
makes us more human, and more
vulnerable, and able to
communicate about tough things.
But it's a challenge that every
family needs to rise up to,
I believe.
And so I would just tell
the kid that they're OK,
and that they're
so loved, and try
to just talk through
fear because you
don't want to hold on to fear.
That's the worst,
fear and shame.
>> It was really sad that she
couldn't eat lots of the things
that we could eat.
And sometimes it can be
unfair, but that's how life is.
It's sad because you used to
have this life where you were
open to everything, but
now you are restricted
to all the things you can eat
and lots of the other things
you can do like walk,
or run, or exercise.
But be grateful that
you're still alive
and that you can still live the
life that you wanted to live.
She got her payment for
getting run over by the car.
She finally got it.
And that allowed us,
actually, to travel.
So sometimes when
you get hurt, you
can also get something good
after all the chaos is over.
>> I'll be in a bad mood
because I slept wrong.
My neck hurts.
[LAUGHTER]
It's like, oh, yeah,
I'm annoyed right now.
I got bad sleep last night.
I mean, she's been
telling me she
struggles with sleep forever.
It just reminds me
how good I have it,
as well as how
positive I need to be
because my problems of
sleeping wrong or not
getting the right lunch I wanted
because they were sold out,
it's just not that big a deal.
So, yeah.
Yeah, I think it's
taught me a lot.
You definitely think about
how much other people take
for granted when
you're around someone
with this type of
invisible illness.
For a long time I was
resentful because I was like,
I have to change myself because
of this when I'm already
going through so many problems.
But, again, you just grow up.
Makes you grow up a little
bit faster, appreciate
what you have and just try
to make the best of things
at the end of the day.
>> One of the really impactful
lessons that I've learned about
healing is that healing
is not black and white.
It's not a yes or no.
It's much more alive than that.
And we may not ever be free
of the hindrances of some
of our illnesses,
but the reality
is that we can
still find healing.
And we can still heal every
day for the rest of our lives,
no matter what the doctors say,
or what the diagnosis says,
or even if we're still
dealing with sleep issues,
or digestive issues, or pain.
Our interpretation of what
healing is and what it means
can have such an impact on
how we feel about ourselves
and how we feel about the
lives that we're given to live.
>> I wouldn't change a thing.
Because with all of that, I
can avert crisis, and misery,
and death for other people,
and be a way shower,
and shine a light on a path
that's an easier, softer way,
and open a door to
happiness, and joyousness,
and peacefulness, and
youthfulness, and prosperity,
and abundance, and wholeness,
and unity, and power, and joy,
and strength, and beauty.
It's a beautiful thing.
I wouldn't trade
anything for it now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) I've been
walking in a country road.
And I've been chasing
after my shadow.
Nobody asked me my name.
Maybe my baby while
I'm singing again.